Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health

RISK OF CARDIOVASCULAR EVENTS PREDICTED BY THE RAMA-EGAT SCORE AMONG
HIV-INFECTED PATIENTS IN THAILAND Supawadee Suppadungsuk, Sukit Yamwong
and Somnuek Sungkanuparph Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand Abstract.
Cardiovascular disease has become an important cause of death among
HIV-infected patients. A cross sectional study was conducted to
determine the risk for cardiovascular events among HIV-infected patients
who visited the Infectious Disease Clinic at Ramathibodi Hospital,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. The risk for cardiovascular
events was determined using the Rama-EGAT risk score. Patients were
categorized into two groups by score: high risk group with a Rama-EGAT
score ≥6 and low risk group with a Rama-EGAT score &lt;6. One hundred
nine patients were included in the study. The mean age of participants
was 47.3 years old, 73 (67%) were male. Mean duration of HIV infection
among participants was 8.5 years and the mean CD4 cell count was 485
cells/mm3. Nearly all the patients had received antiretroviral therapy.
The mean body weight and body mass index (BMI) were 61.2 kg and 22.5
kg/m2, respectively. Of the 109 participants, 12 (11%) had a high risk
for cardiovascular events. On multivariate analysis, older age \[odds
ratio (OR) per 5 years increase = 8.6; p=0.005\], diabetes mellitus (OR
= 63.1; p=0.020) and lower HDL (OR per 5 mg/dl decrease = 4.3, p=0.020)
were factors significantly associated with high EGAT risk score. Early
screening for diabetes mellitus and HDL levels, as well as appropriate
glycemic control and regular exercise are crucial for preventing
cardiovascular events among HIV-infected patients receiving
antiretroviral therapy in Thailand. Keywords: HIV, risk, cardiovascular
events, Rama-EGAT Score, Thailand

INTRODUCTION Currently, many HIV-infected patients in Thailand are
receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART), which decreases AIDS-related
mortality and opportunistic infections and improves quality of life
Correspondence: Dr Somnuek Sungkanuparph, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, 270 Rama VI
Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand. Tel: +66 (0) 2201 1581; Fax: +66 (0) 2201
2232 E-mail: somnuek.sun@mahidol.ac.th 818

(Manosuthi et al, 2006). HIV-infected patients are now living longer
(Manosuthi et al, 2006; Sungkanuparph et al, 2008). As this population
grows older, cardiovascular disease has become more important. A Swiss
HIV Cohort study found the incidence of cardiovascular disease increased
with increasing age (Hasse et al, 2011). Factors contributing to
cardiovascular risk include host factor, disease (virus) factors and
treatment (ART) factors (Barbaro and Klatt, 2002; Das, 2010; Triant et
al, 2007). HIV infection is associated with Vol 44 No. 5 September 2013

Risk of Cardiovascular Events among HIV-infected Patients

greater carotid intima media thickening and causes atherosclerosis
(Grunfeld et al, 2009). HIV has been reported to infect smooth muscle
cells and increase monocyte chemo-attraction which subsequently develop
into foam cells, possibly resulting in increased cardiovascular risk
(Malvestutto and Aberg, 2010). Host factor includes traditional risk
factors such as aging, hypertension, smoking, dyslipidemia and diabetes
mellitus. Treatment factors, such as anti-retroviral therapy (ART) may
affect lipid metabolism and cause insulin resistance (Currier et al,
2008). Some studies have demonstrated ART, especially protease
inhibitors (PIs), may increase the risk of acute myocardial infarction
(Lang et al, 2010; Worm et al, 2010). The SMART study showed
discontinuing ART or using it intermittently was associated with greater
mortality, greater progression to AIDS and a greater risk of other major
events, especially cardiovascular diseases \[Strategies for Management
of Antiretroviral Therapy (SMART) Study Group, 2006; Strategies for
Management of Anti-Retroviral Therapy/INSIGHT; DAD Study Groups, 2008\].
Therefore, evaluation of cardiovascular risk, myocardial infarction, is
an important part of caring for HIV-infected patients. In Thailand, the
use of ART has increased over the past decade (Chasombat et al, 2006).
Currently, more than 200,000 HIV-infected Thais are receiving ART
(UNAIDS, 2010). ART has significantly reduced mortality and morbidity
among HIV-infected patients in Thailand (Manosuthi et al, 2006;
Jongwutiwes et al, 2007; Sungkanuparph et al, 2008). However, the risk
of cardiovascular events among HIV-infected Thai patients has never been
reported. Scores can be used to predict the risk of coronary artery
disease over 10 years; Vol 44 No. 5 September 2013

the Framingham heart score and RamaEGAT score are examples. Recent
studies have demonstrated that Rama-EGAT score is more appropriate for
predicting coronary artery disease risk in the Thai population because
the Framingham risk score may overestimate the risk in Thais (Sritara et
al, 2003; Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collboration et al, 2007; Sritara
et al, 2007). This study evaluated the risk for cardiovascular events
among HIVinfected patients attending Ramathibodi Hospital using the
Rama-EGAT risk score and determining predictive factors that contributed
to the high Rama-EGAT score. MATERIALS AND METHODS Study design and data
collection

A cross sectional study was conducted among HIV-infected patients
attending the Infectious Disease Clinic, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
Univesity, Bangkok, Thailand between August and December 2011. This
study was approved by the Ramathibodi Hospital Ethics Committee. All
participants were aged &gt;35 years. Patients were excluded if they had
a history of a cardiovascular event, such as myocardial infarction or
stroke. Lipodystrophy syndrome was diagnosed clinically. The patient
risk for a cardiovascular event was calculated using the Rama-EGAT risks
core (Table 1) (Sritara et al, 2003). The 10-year cardiovascular risk
based on the Rama-EGAT score is shown in Table 2. Patients were
classified into two groups based on their Rama-EGAT risk score. The
Rama-EGAT risk score came from the EGAT study (Sritara et al, 2003),
which followed 3,499 Thais employed by the Electricity Generating
Authority of Thailand (EGAT) from 1985 to 1997. Cardiovascular event
risk for 10 years is given as a score and includes age, blood pressure
819

Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health

Table 1 Rama-EGAT Risk Score. Variable Age &lt; 35 35-39 40-44 45-49
50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 ≥75 Blood pressure SBP&lt;120, DBP &lt;80
SBP 120-129, DBP 80-84 SBP 130-139, DBP 85-89 SBP 140-159, DBP 90-99
SBP≥160, DBP ≥100 Waist circumference &gt;90 cm No Yes Cholesterol
&lt;160 160-199 200-279 ≥280 HDL &lt;35 35-49 50-59 &gt;60 Diabetes
mellitus No Yes Current smoker No Yes Alcohol drinker No Yes

Score -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 1 1 2 0 1 -2 0 0 2 2 0 -1 -5 0 1 0 1 0 1

and/or history of hypertension/antihypertensive drug use, total
cholesterol level, HDL level, current smoking status, history of alcohol
use, waist circumference and history of diabetic mellitus. A high 820

Table 2 Rama-EGAT Risk Score and 10-year cardiovascular risk. Total
Rama-EGAT Score ≤-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 ≥14

10-year cardiovascular risk 2% 3% 3% 4% 5% 7% 8% 10% 13% 16% 20% 25% 31%
37% 45% ≥53%

Rama-EGAT risk score is ≥ 6 (defined as a 10-year cardiovascular risk ≥
10%) and a low Rama-EGAT risk score is &lt; 6. The 10% 10-year risk is
used as the cut-off point by the National Cholesterol Education Program
(NCEP) (Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Cholesterol in Adults, 2001). The primary objective of this study
was to evaluate the risk for cardiovascular events among HIV-infected
patients using the Rama-EGAT score. The secondary objective was to
determine the predicting factors that contributed to the high RamaEGAT
scores. Statistical analysis

Mean (± standard deviation, SD), median (interquartile range, IQR) and
frequency (%) were used to describe patient characteristic where
appropriate. The Student’s t-test and Fisher exact test were used to
compare two means Vol 44 No. 5 September 2013

Risk of Cardiovascular Events among HIV-infected Patients

Table 3 Baseline characteristics of HIV-infected patients in high and
low risk groups. Rama-EGAT score Characteristics All

(n=109)

High risk group (n=12)

Low risk p-value group (n=97)

Age in years, mean ±SD 47.3 ± 9.7 61.5 ± 9.2 45.6 ± 8.3 Gender, number
(%)\
Male 73 (67) 10 (83) 63 (65) Female 36 (33) 2 (17) 34 (35) Current
smoking, number (%) 29 (27) 4 (33) 25 (26) Alcoholic drinking, number
(%) 16 (15) 1 (8) 15 (16) Body weight in kg, mean ±SD 61.2 ± 10.6 65.5 ±
8.3 60.7 ± 10.8 BMI in kg/m2, mean ±SD 22.5 ± 3.0 23.8 ± 2.9 22.3 ± 3.0
Waist circumference in cm, mean ±SD 80.9 ± 8.4 87.2 ± 8.7 80.2 ± 8.1
Blood pressure in mmHg, mean ±SD\
Systolic 132 ± 18 144 ± 20 130 ± 17 Diastolic 77 ± 11 80 ± 12 77 ± 11
Hypertension, number (%) 20 (18) 8 (67) 12 (12) Diabetes mellitus,
number (%) 14 (13) 7 (58) 7 (7) Lipid levels in mg/dl, mean ±SD\
Triglycerides 215 ± 164 259 ± 164 209 ± 164 Total cholesterol 225 ± 54
234 ± 36 224 ± 56 HDL cholesterol 47 ± 14 40 ± 9 48 ± 15 LDL cholesterol
137 ± 40 130 ± 31 138 ± 41 Non-HDL cholesterol 177 ± 42 189 ± 28 176 ±
38 Total cholesterol/HDL cholesterol ratio 4.7 ± 1.2 5.8 ± 1.1 4.6 ± 1.2
Use of lipid lowering drugs, number (%) 15 (14) 2 (17) 13 (13) Duration
of known HIV infection, years, mean ±SD 8.5 ± 4.2 8.8 ± 3.3 8.5 ± 4.3
CD4 cell count in cells/mm3, mean ±SD 485 ± 193 502 ± 144 483 ± 199
Lipodystrophy, number (%) 20 (18) 4 (33) 16 (17) ART regimens\
NNRTI-based 80 (73) 9 (75) 71 (73) PI-based 29 (27) 3 (25) 26 (27)
Duration of ART in years, mean ±SD 8.1 ± 4.0 8.3 ± 3.3 8.0 ± 4.3

&lt;0.001 0.330 0.730 &gt;0.99 0.141 0.115 0.006 0.008 0.449 &lt;0.001
&lt;0.001 0.328 0.567 0.075 0.519 0.067 0.078 0.670 0.852 0.748 0.227
0.990 0.823

SD, standard deviation; ART, anti-retroviral therapy; NNRTI,
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; PI, protease inhibitor

of continuous variables. The chi-square test was performed to compare
categorical variables. Multivariate analysis was used to determine
factors predictive of a high risk Rama-EGAT score. Variables with
p-value &lt; 0.10 were included in the multivariate analysis model. All
analyses were performed using the SPSS program Vol 44 No. 5 September
2013

version 16.0. A p-value &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. RESULTS Patient characteristics

One hundred nine HIV-infected patients were included in the study. The
821

Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health

Table 4 Multivariate analysis of predicting factors for high Rama-EGAT
score. Variables Age (per 5 year increase) Diabetes mellitus
Hypertension Waist circumference (cm) HDL (per 5 mg/dl decrease)

Odds ratios

95% confidence intervals

p-values

8.6 63.1 3.2 2.4 4.3

1.9-38.3 1.9-206.9 0.3-38.3 0.9-6.3 1.1-10.0

0.005 0.020 0.356 0.081 0.020

mean (±SD) age of subjects was 47.3 (±9.7) years; 67% were males. The
mean (±SD) CD4 cell count was 485 (±193) cells/mm3. The mean (±SD)
duration of known HIV infection was 8.5 (±4.2) years. Twenty patients
(18%) had lipodystrophy. Twenty patients (18%) had hypertension and were
using anti-hypertensive drugs. Fourteen patients (12.8%) had diabetes
mellitus. The means (±SD) body weight and body mass index (BMI) were
61.2 (±10.6) kg and 22.5 (±3.0) kg/m2, respectively (Table 3). Rama-EGAT
risk scores

The mean (±SD) Rama-EGAT score was 1.5 (±3.3). Twelve HIV-infected
patients (11%) had a high Rama-EGAT score (high risk group) (Table 3).
The mean age of the high risk group was significantly higher than the
low risk group (61.5 vs 45.6 years, p &lt; 0.001). The mean (±SD) waist
circumference was significantly higher in the high risk group than in
the low risk group (87.2 vs 80.2 cms, p=0.006). The mean systolic blood
pressure was higher in the high risk group (144 vs 130 mmHg, p=0.008).
The proportion of patients with hypertension was higher in the high risk
group (67% vs 12%, p&lt;0.001) and the proportion with diabetes mellitus
was also higher in the high risk group (58% vs 7%, p&lt;0.001). Gender,
current smoking, alcohol use, duration of known HIV 822

infection, CD4 cell count, lipodystrophy, diastolic blood pressure, and
antiretroviral regimen were not significantly different between the high
and low risk groups. The mean HDL cholesterol level was nonsignificantly
lower in the high risk group (40 vs 48 mg/dl, p=0.075). On multivariate
analysis, age \[odds ratio (OR) per 5 years had an increase of 8.6,
p=0.005\], diabetes mellitus (OR 63.1, p=0.020) and HDL (OR per 5 mg/dl
decrease = 4.3, p=0.020) were factors significantly associated with a
high Rama-EGAT score (Table 4). DISCUSSION Eleven percent of
HIV-infected Thai patients studied had a high 10-year cardiovascular
risk based on their RamaEGAT score. This emphasizes the importance of
evaluating cardiovascular risk in HIV-infected patients. This
cardiovascular risk is higher than the 2% found in a previous study
conducted in Thailand during 1996-2009 (Edwards-Jackson et al, 2011).
The higher risk in our study could be due to: the present study was
conducted more recently than the previous study, the mean age of
patients in the present study was older than the previous study (47.3 vs
41.0 years old) and the proportion of male patients in the present study
was higher than the previous study (67% vs 55%).

Vol 44 No. 5 September 2013

Risk of Cardiovascular Events among HIV-infected Patients

On multivariate analysis, diabetes mellitus was a strong high risk
predictor. Patients with diabetes mellitus had a 60 times higher chance
of having high cardiovascular risk. For every 5 year increase in age the
subjects had an 8.6 times higher chance of having high cardiovascular
risk. A high HDL level was a protective factor. Every 5 mg/dl increase
in HDL was associated with a 23% decrease of being in the high risk
group. This information is useful for clinicians to help identify
HIV-infected patients at high risk for cardiovascular disease and to
modify the risk factors for these patients. A limitation of the present
study was the relatively small sample size, which may not allow the
identification of some risk factors, such as family history of
cardiovascular disease, duration of HIV infection, antiretroviral
regimen, and lipodystrophy. However, the results of the present study
provide important information for physicians caring for HIV-infected
patients.

In conclusion, the Rama-EGAT score found 11% of HIV-infected patients
studied had a high risk for cardiovascular events. The predicting
factors for high caridovasvular risk among HIV-infected patients were
older age, presence of diabetes mellitus, and low HDL level. Early
screening for diabetes mellitus, glycemic control, regular exercise to
increase HDL levels and modifying other traditional risk factors are
cardiac risk modification strategies important for HIV-infected
patients. REFERENCES Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration, Barzi F,
Patel A, et al. Cardiovascular risk prediction tools for populations in
Asia. J Epidemiol Community Health 2007; 61: 115-21. Barbaro G, Klatt
EC. HIV infection and the Vol 44 No. 5 September 2013

cardiovascular system. AIDS Rev 2002; 4: 93-103.

Chasombat S, Lertpiriyasuwat C, Thanprasertsuk S, Suebsaeng, Lo YR. The
national access to antiretroviral program for PHA (NAPHA) in Thailand.
Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 2006; 37: 704-15. Currier JS,
Lundgren JD, Carr A, et al. Epidemiological evidence for cardiovascular
disease in HIV-infected patients and relationship to highly active
antiretroviral therapy. Circulation 2008; 118: e29-35. Das S. Risk of
cardiovascular disease in HIVinfected patients. J Antimicrob Chemother
2010; 65: 386-9.

Edwards-Jackson N, Kerr S, Tieu H, et al. Cardiovascular risk assessment
in persons with HIV infection in the developing world: comparing three
risk equations in a cohort of HIV-infected Thais. HIV Med 2011; 12:
510-15.

Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol in Adults. Executive summary of the third report of The
National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult
Treatment Panel III). JAMA 2001; 285: 2486-97. Grunfeld C, Delaney JA,
Wanke C, et al. Preclinical atherosclerosis due to HIV infection:
carotid intima-medial thickness measurements from the FRAM study. AIDS
2009; 23: 1841-9.

Hasse B, Ledergerber B, Furrer H, et al. Morbidity and aging in
HIV-infected persons: the Swiss HIV cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 2011;
53: 1130-9. Jongwutiwes U, Kiertiburanakul S, Sungkanuparph S. Impact of
antiretroviral therapy on the relapse of cryptococcosis and survival of
HIV-infected patients with cryptococcal infection. Curr HIV Res 2007; 5:
355-60.

Lang S, Mary-Krause M, Cotte L, et al. Impact 823

Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health of individual antiretroviral
drugs on the risk of myocardial infarction in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients: a case-control study nested within the French
Hospital Database on HIV ANRS cohort CO4. Arch Intern Med 2010; 170:
1228-38.

Malvestutto CD, Aberg JA. Coronary heart disease in people infected with
HIV. Cleve Clin J Med 2010; 77: 547-56.

Manosuthi W, Chottanapand S, Thongyen S, Chaovavanich A, Sungkanuparph
S. Survival rate and risk factors of mortality among
HIV/tuberculosis-coinfected patients with and without antiretroviral
therapy. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2006; 43: 42-6. Sritara P,
Cheepudomwit S, Chapnan N, et al. Twelve-year changes in vascular risk
factors and their associations with mortality in a cohort of 3499 Thais:
the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand Study. Int J Epidemiol
2003; 32: 461-8.

Sritara P, Patoomanunt P, Woodward M, et al. Associations between serum
lipids and causes of mortality in a cohort of 3,499 urban Thais: The
Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT) study. Angiology
2007; 58: 757-63.

Strategies for Management of Antiretroviral Therapy (SMART) Study Group.
CD4+

824

count-guided interruption of antiretroviral treatment. N Engl J Med
2006; 355: 2283-96.

Strategies for Management of Anti-Retroviral Therapy/INSIGHT; DAD Study
Groups. Use of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and risk of
myocardial infarction in HIV-infected patients. AIDS 2008; 22: F17-24.

Sungkanuparph S, Chakriyanuyok T, Butthum B. Antiretroviral therapy in
AIDS patients with CMV disease: impact on the survival and long-term
treatment outcome. J Infect 2008; 56: 40-3.

Triant VA, Lee H, Hadigan C, Grinspoon SK. Increased acute myocardial
infarction rates and cardiovascular risk factors among patients with
human immunodeficiency virus disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007; 92:
2506-12.

Worm SW, Sabin C, Weber R, et al. Risk of myocardial infarction in
patients with HIV infection exposed to specific individual
antiretroviral drugs from the 3 major drug classes: the data collection
on adverse events of anti-HIV drugs (D:A:D) study. J Infect Dis 2010;
201: 318-30. UNAIDS. UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic. Geneva:
UNAIDS, 2010. \[Cited 29 Feb 2012\]. Available from: URL: http://
www.unaids.org/globalreport/Global\_report.htm

Vol 44 No. 5 September 2013


