ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Association of Cardiovascular Health With Subclinical Disease and
Incident Events: The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis Tamar S.
Polonsky, MD, MSCI; Hongyan Ning, MD, MS; Martha L. Daviglus, MD, PhD;
Kiang Liu, PhD; Gregory L. Burke, MD, MS; Mary Cushman, MD, MSc; John
Eng, MD; Aaron R. Folsom, MD; Pamela L. Lutsey, PhD, MPH; Jennifer A.
Nettleton, PhD; Wendy S. Post, MD, MS; Ralph L. Sacco, MD; Moyses Szklo,
MD, MPH; Donald M. Lloyd-Jones, MD, ScM

Background-—Few adults have ideal cardiovascular health (CVH). We
studied associations of an overall CVH score with subclinical
cardiovascular disease and events. We assessed whether associations
varied by race/ethnicity. Methods and Results-—Among 5961 participants
in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis, components of CVH were
measured at baseline, 2000-2002: systolic blood pressure, total
cholesterol, fasting glucose, smoking, physical activity, diet, and body
mass index. Levels were classiﬁed as ideal (2 points), intermediate (1
point), and poor (0 points) according to American Heart Association
deﬁnitions. Points were summed to produce a CVH score (0-7 low, 8-11
moderate, 12-14 high). Coronary artery calcium, carotid intima-media
thickness, and left ventricular mass were measured at baseline.
Cardiovascular disease was deﬁned as myocardial infarction, coronary
heart disease death, resuscitated cardiac arrest, stroke, heart failure,
or peripheral artery disease. Follow-up was 10.3 years. Regression
models were used to examine associations of the CVH score with
subclinical disease and events, adjusting for age, sex, and education.
Analyses were stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. Adults with high or moderate
CVH scores had signiﬁcantly lower odds of coronary artery calcium and
lower carotid intima-media thickness and left ventricular mass than
adults with low CVH scores. Adults with high or moderate CVH scores were
67% (95%CI 41% to 82%) and 37% (95%CI 22% to 49%) less likely,
respectively, to experience a cardiovascular disease event than adults
with low scores. There was no interaction with race/ ethnicity.
Conclusions-—There is a graded inverse association between CVH scores
and measures of subclinical and overt cardiovascular disease that is
similar across race/ethnic groups. ( J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e004894.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894.) Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by
on January 31, 2024

Key Words: cardiovascular disease prevention • disparities • subclinical
atherosclerosis risk factor

S

ince the American Heart Association (AHA) announced its Strategic Impact
Goals—“by 2020 to improve the health of all Americans by 20% while
reducing deaths from cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and stroke by
20%1”—numerous studies have conﬁrmed that the construct of ideal
cardiovascular health (CVH) has important implications for public
health.2-9 For example, many investigators have shown that adults with 6
to 7 ideal metrics experience a signiﬁcantly lower risk of
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the short and long term
compared to adults with fewer ideal

health metrics.3,4,8 Further, ideal CVH is also associated with lower
incidence of cancer and all-cause mortality.8,10 Using data from the
Framingham Offspring Study, Xanthakis et al showed a strong inverse
association between CVH and levels of circulating biomarkers, measures
of subclinical disease, and cardiovascular events (CVEs).9 The
association between CVH and outcomes remained signiﬁcant even after
adjustment for the biomarkers and subclinical disease—intermediate
markers likely to be on the causal pathway for the development of
cardiovascular disease. The

From the Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL (T.S.P.);
Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
(H.N., K.L., D.M.L.-J.); Institute for Minority Health Research,
University of Illinois at Chicago, IL (M.L.D.); Department of Public
Health Sciences, Wake Forest University, Winston Salem, NC (G.L.B.);
Departments of Medicine and Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University
of Vermont, Colchester, VT (M.C.); Russell H. Morgan Department of
Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD (J.E.); Division of Epidemiology & Community
Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN (A.R.F., P.L.L.);
Health Science Center, Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics, and
Environmental Sciences, University of Texas, Houston, TX (J.A.N.);
Departments of Medicine (W.S.P.) and Epidemiology (M.S.), Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD; Department of Neurology, University of Miami,
FL (R.L.S.). Correspondence to: Tamar S. Polonsky, MD, MSCI, Department
of Medicine, University of Chicago, 5841 S Maryland Ave, MC6080,
Chicago, IL 60637. E-mail: tpolonsky@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu Received
October 21, 2016; accepted February 14, 2017. ª 2017 The Authors.
Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley
Blackwell. This is an open access article under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which
permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work
is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modiﬁcations or
adaptations are made.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Journal of the American Heart Association

1

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Methods Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Study Participants The study design for MESA has been published
elsewhere.11 In brief, MESA is a prospective cohort study of 6814
persons aged 45 to 84 years without known CVD at baseline.

Participants were recruited from July 2000 through September 2002 and
identiﬁed themselves as white (38%), black (28%), Hispanic (22%), or
Chinese (12%) at the time of enrollment. All imaging and risk-factor
data used for the current analyses were collected at the baseline
examination. The study was approved by the institutional review boards
of each site, and all participants gave written informed consent.

Measurement of Health Factors AHA-deﬁned cutoffs for poor, intermediate,
and ideal levels of each health factor are found in Table 1. Tobacco use
was deﬁned as current, former, or no prior use. Total cholesterol and
plasma glucose were measured from blood samples obtained after a 12-hour
fast. By use of a Dinamap Pro 1000 automated oscillometric
sphygmomanometer (Critikon, Tampa, FL), resting blood pressure was
measured 3 times with the participant in a seated position. The mean of
the last 2 measurements was used.

Measurement of Health Behaviors See Table 1 for AHA-deﬁned cutoffs of
poor, intermediate, and ideal levels of each health behavior. Weight and
height were measured using standardized techniques with the participant
dressed in light clothing. Body mass index was deﬁned as the weight in
kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters. Physical
activity was assessed using the Typical Week Physical Activity Survey, a
self-reporting measure that was adapted from the Cross-Cultural Activity
Participation

Table 1. American Heart Association Deﬁnitions of Poor, Intermediate,
and Ideal CVH for Each Metric Goal/Metric

Poor

Intermediate

Ideal

Current smoking

Yes

Former ≤12 months

Never or quit ≥12 months

Total cholesterol

≥240 mg/dL

200 to 239 mg/dL or treated to ideal levels

&lt;200 mg/dL without medication

Blood pressure

SBP ≥140 or DBP ≥90 mm Hg

SBP 120 to 139 mm Hg or DBP 80 to 89 mm Hg or treated to ideal levels

&lt;120/&lt;80 mm Hg without medication

Fasting plasma glucose

≥126 mg/dL

100 to 125 mg/dL or treated to ideal levels

&lt;100 mg/dL without medication

Body mass index

≥30 kg/m2

25 to 29.9 kg/m2

&lt;25 kg/m2

Physical activity

None

1 to 149 min/week moderate intensity or 1 to 74 vigorous intensity

≥150 min/week moderate intensity or ≥75 min/week vigorous intensity

Healthy diet score\*

0 to 1 components

2 to 3 components

4 to 5 components

CVH indicates cardiovascular health. \*Fruits and vegetables ≥4.5
cups/day; ﬁsh ≥2 3.5-oz servings/week (preferably oily ﬁsh); ﬁber-rich
whole grains ≥3 1-oz-equivalent servings/day; sodium &lt;1500 mg/day;
sugarsweetened beverages ≤450 kcal (36 oz)/week.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Journal of the American Heart Association

2

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

analyses by Xanthakis et al did not include coronary artery calcium
(CAC), a potent measure of subclinical atherosclerosis. Whether the
association of CVH with subsequent events is further mediated by CAC is
not known. In addition, whether such ﬁndings can be replicated in a
multiethnic cohort is not known. Prior investigation by Dong et al
showed a graded inverse association of the number of ideal CVH metrics
and the risk of future events that was similar among white, black, and
Caribbean Hispanics in the Northern Manhattan Study (NOMAS).6 However,
the authors also reported that the Caribbean Hispanic participants
experienced a lower risk of CVEs than whites and blacks, even after
adjustment for age, sex, and the number of ideal health metrics. Using
data from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA), we examined
the association of CVH with measures of subclinical disease, including
CAC, and subsequent CVEs. We assessed heterogeneity of the association
between CVH and outcomes by race/ethnicity and sex. We also sought to
determine whether the association between CVH and outcomes can be fully
explained by intermediate phenotypes or whether additional unmeasured
pathways might also contribute to the risk of CVEs.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Measurement of Subclinical Disease Carr et al have reported the details
of the MESA computed tomographic scanning and interpretation methods for
measurement of CAC.18 The protocol for measuring carotid intima-media
thickness (CIMT) was previously validated in the Cardiovascular Health
Study.19 The protocols for the magnetic resonance imaging acquisition
and analysis to calculate left ventricular (LV) mass were described
previously.20,21

Ascertainment of Events A detailed description of the follow-up methods
is available at www.mesa-nhlbi.org. Brieﬂy, at intervals of 9 to 12
months, interviewers telephoned participants or family members to
inquire about interim hospital admissions, outpatient diagnoses of CVD,
and deaths. Follow-up for this analysis extended DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

through December 2013. To verify self-reported diagnoses, trained
personnel abstracted data from hospital records for an estimated 96% of
hospitalized CVEs; records were available for 95% of outpatient
diagnostic encounters. Next of kin and physicians were interviewed for
participants who experienced out-of-hospital cardiovascular deaths. Two
physician members of the MESA morbidity and mortality review committee
independently classiﬁed events. If they disagreed, then the full
committee made the ﬁnal classiﬁcation. We classiﬁed coronary heart
disease (CHD) events as deﬁnite or probable myocardial infarction, death
due to CHD, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and coronary revascularization.
We classiﬁed CVD events as CHD plus fatal or nonfatal stroke, deﬁnite or
probable heart failure (HF), peripheral arterial disease, and CVD death.
Stroke events included ischemic and hemorrhagic subtypes. HF events
included adults with both preserved and reduced ejection fraction.
Deﬁnite and probable HF required clinical symptoms, such as shortness of
breath, or signs, such as edema. Probable HF further required a
physician diagnosis of HF and medical treatment for HF. Deﬁnite HF also
required pulmonary edema/congestion by chest radiograph and/or a dilated
ventricle or poor LV function by echocardiography or ventriculography,
or evidence of LV diastolic dysfunction. Incident peripheral arterial
disease was deﬁned as lower extremity revascularization or the
development of an anklebrachial index ≤0.90, among participants whose
baseline ankle-brachial index was &gt;0.90 but &lt;1.4. The
ankle-brachial index was measured at exams 3 and 5. Details of
anklebrachial index measurement have been reported previously.22

Statistical Analysis We deﬁned ideal, intermediate, and poor levels of
each health factor and behavior according to the deﬁnitions outlined in
the 2020 Impact Goals,1 with adjustment of the classiﬁcation of diet as
described above. In our preliminary analyses we found that &lt;1% of
MESA participants met all 7 criteria for ideal CVH. To examine the
spectrum of CVH we calculated an overall CVH score based on the health
level of each factor and behavior. Ideal levels were given 2 points,
intermediate 1 point, and poor 0 points. Each participant was then given
a cumulative score by adding points for each health factor and behavior.
The lowest possible score was zero (poor levels of all criteria), and
the highest score was 14 (ideal levels of all 7 criteria). As with prior
analyses, we stratiﬁed participants into 3 mutually exclusive categories
of overall CVH: high (12-14 points), moderate (8-11 points), and low
(0-7 points).23,24 The CVH score was intended to provide a comprehensive
assessment of CVH but was not intended as a tool for risk prediction.
Journal of the American Heart Association

3

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Study.12,13 Only intentional exercise was included in the current
analysis. Activities such as low-impact aerobics, walking, and yoga were
considered moderately intense. Activities such as running, basketball,
and tennis were considered vigorous. Dietary intake over the past year
was assessed using a 120-item food frequency questionnaire.14 Validity
of the questionnaire was previously reported in a sample of white,
black, and Hispanic individuals, and it was subsequently amended to
include dishes unique to Chinese populations.14-16 Participants recorded
frequency of consumption and serving size (small, medium, and large) of
speciﬁc food and beverage items. Frequency options ranged from
rare/never, to 2+ times/day for foods, and 6+ times/day for beverages.
We calculated servings/day for each item as the product of the reported
frequency and serving size (small weighted by 0.5, medium by 1.0, and
large by 1.5). The structure of the food frequency questionnaire did not
permit calculation of sodium content or fruit/vegetable consumption
beyond 2 servings/day. As a result, we could not calculate a diet score
as deﬁned in the Strategic Impact Goals. Instead, dietary patterns were
derived using a principalcomponents analysis. The Whole Grains and
Fruits pattern was shown to have a strong inverse association with CVD,
and so it was used for the current analysis.17 High scores for the Whole
Grains and Fruits pattern reﬂect high consumption of fruit, whole
grains, green leafy vegetables, nuts, and low-fat dairy and low
consumption of red meat, reﬁned grains, and sugar-sweetened beverages,
which resembles the ideal diet recommended in the Strategic Impact
Goals. Dietary scores were adjusted for caloric intake. For these
analyses, the distribution of potential scores was divided into
quartiles. The top quartile was considered ideal, the middle quartiles
intermediate, and the bottom quartile poor.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Results After excluding participants with missing data on CVH metrics,
the ﬁnal study sample for analyses related to the CVH score and CVD
events included 5961 men and women. The sample sizes for analyses that
included measures of subclinical disease were 5956 (CAC), 5889 (CIMT),
4384 (LV mass), and 4343 (CAC, CIMT, and LV mass). Baseline
characteristics according to overall CVH score are shown in Table 2. The
majority of participants had moderate CVH scores (52%), followed by low
(41.2%) and high (6.8%) CVH scores. Compared to those with low health
scores, adults with DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Table 2. Baseline Characteristics According to CVH Score— Multi-Ethnic
Study of Atherosclerosis, 2000-2002\* Low CVH (0-7 Points) N=2456

Moderate CVH (8-11 Points) N=3097

High CVH (12-14 Points) N=408

Mean age, y

64.1

62.1

59.5

Male, %

48.5

46.3

39.2

White

34.6

43.4

49.5

Black

34.8

22.0

11.0

Hispanic

26.0

20.8

10.5

Chinese

Race/ethnicity, %

4.6

13.8

28.9

Bachelor’s degree or higher, %

26.1

40.9

59.6

Annual income &gt;\$50 000, %

36.2

45.9

55.2

Systolic blood pressure, mm Hg (SD)

134 (21)

123 (20)

108 (12)

52.12

21.6

2.9

198 (39.5)

193 (32.8)

179 (24.1)

32.6

9.3

1.5

High-density lipoprotein cholesterol, mg/dL (SD)

48.4 (13.4)

52.5 (15.5)

56.2 (16.7)

Fasting glucose, mg/dL (SD)

108.3 (39.8)

89.9 (18.0)

84.4 (8.7)

25.2

3.7

0.3

Use of antihypertensive medication, % Total cholesterol, mg/dL (SD) Use
of lipid-lowering medication, %

Use of glucose-lowering medication, % Current smoker, %

19.8

8.7

0.5

Body mass index, kg/m2 (SD)

31.1 (5.4)

26.7 (4.5)

23.2 (2.7)

Minutes of moderate or vigorous physical activity/week

272

472

614

Ideal diet, n (%)†

36 (1.5)

169 (5.5)

69 (16.9)

Whole grains and fruits pattern was used for this analysis, reﬂecting
high consumption of fruit, whole grains, green leafy vegetables, nuts,
and low-fat dairy and low consumption of red meat, reﬁned grains, and
sugar-sweetened beverages. The top quartile of the possible diet scores
was considered ideal. CVH indicates cardiovascular health. \*There is a
statistically signiﬁcant difference in all baseline characteristics
between categories, P&lt;0.001. † Diet scores were calculated using a
principal-components analysis of the food frequency questionnaire.

high CVH scores were younger and more likely to be women, whites, and
Chinese. Higher median income and years of education were also
associated with higher CVH. Journal of the American Heart Association

4

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Baseline characteristics were compared according to the overall CVH
score using general linear models for continuous variables and
cross-tabulations for categorical variables. The dependent variables for
measures of subclinical disease were baseline prevalence of CAC &gt;0,
mean CIMT, and mean LV mass. Logistic regression was used to compute
odds ratios for CAC &gt;0 at baseline. General linear models were used
to examine the association of the CVH score with CIMT and LV mass. The
low CVH group served as the reference. All analyses were performed for
the entire cohort and stratiﬁed by race/ethnic group. We examined the
association of the CVH score with CHD and CVD events using Cox
proportional hazards models. We veriﬁed that the proportional hazards
assumption was appropriate. All of the models were ﬁtted unadjusted or
adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity, and education. Additionally, to
assess the extent to which the associations were explained by potential
intermediate phenotypes of subclinical disease, we then adjusted each
model for CAC, CIMT, and LV mass. CAC scores were expressed as ln
(CAC+1). We tested interactions between the CVH score and sex and
race/ethnicity in multivariate models of CVD and CHD events. Effect
modiﬁcation among race/ethnicity, sex, and CVH was tested using a 2-way
interaction. We included the product of the CVH9race/ethnicity and
CVH9sex terms in the model, and no signiﬁcant interaction (P for
interaction &lt;0.05) was present. To examine further the dose-response
relationship between continuous CVH scores and the risk of events, we
added penalized cubic splines to our Cox proportional hazards models.
Penalized cubic splines provide nonparametric estimates for the hazard
ratio associated with each cardiovascular score. All analyses were
performed for the entire cohort and stratiﬁed by race/ethnic group. All
analyses were performed using SAS version 9.2 (SAS institute, Cary, NC).
A P&lt;0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant. The penalized cubic
spline model was implemented using coxph and pspline functions in R
version 2.14.1.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Table 3. Measures of Subclinical CVD According to CVH Score—Multi-Ethnic
Study of Atherosclerosis, 2000-2002\* Low CVH (0-7 Points)

Moderate CVH (8-11 Points)

High CVH (12-14 Points)

P Value†

1442/2456 (58.7)

1403/3097 (45.3)

120/408 (29.4)

&lt;0.001

White

586/850 (68.9)

699/1343 (52.0)

69/202 (34.2)

&lt;0.001

Black

422/854 (49.4)

258/681 (37.9)

6/45 (13.3)

&lt;0.001

Hispanic

360/639 (56.3)

231/646 (35.8)

11/43 (25.6)

&lt;0.001

Chinese

74/113 (65.5)

215/427 (50.3)

34/118 (28.8)

&lt;0.001

1.0

0.57 (0.50-0.65)

0.29 (0.22-0.38)

&lt;0.001

White

1.0

0.56 (0.45-0.69)

0.33 (0.23-0.49)

&lt;0.001

Black

1.0

0.66 (0.52-0.82)

0.20 (0.08-0.52)

&lt;0.001

Hispanic

1.0

0.49 (0.38-0.64)

0.28 (0.12-0.63)

&lt;0.001

Chinese

1.0

0.70 (0.44-1.12)

0.30 (0.16-0.54)

&lt;0.001

105 (27, 368)

75 (19, 267)

49 (11, 147)

&lt;0.001

White

150 (39, 456)

107 (20, 346)

34 (9, 156)

&lt;0.001

Black

90 (23, 301)

59 (17, 215)

15 (4, 50)

&lt;0.001

Hispanic

77 (19, 291)

61 (18, 204)

28 (13, 151)

&lt;0.001

Chinese

65 (27, 256)

59 (17, 186)

89 (40, 155)

&lt;0.001

0.91 (0.20)

0.85 (0.18)

0.77 (0.14)

&lt;0.001

White

0.91 (0.20)

0.85 (0.19)

0.76 (0.14)

&lt;0.001

Black

0.92 (0.19)

0.88 (0.18)

0.81 (0.17)

&lt;0.001

Hispanic

0.90 (0.20)

0.82 (0.18)

0.77 (0.15)

&lt;0.001

Chinese

0.89 (0.18)

0.83 (0.17)

0.76 (0.14)

&lt;0.001

80.2

77.0

73.3

&lt;0.001

White

78.2 (15.4)

74.7 (14.5)

72.2 (12.4)

&lt;0.001

Black

82.4 (19.2)

80.4 (16.9)

75.6 (17.1)

&lt;0.001

Hispanic

83.4 (17.8)

78.9 (15.3)

76.6 (11.9)

&lt;0.001

Chinese

77.7 (12.2)

74.6 (12.9)

67.3 (11.2)

&lt;0.001

Overall prevalence of CAC &gt;0, n (%)

Overall multivariable-adjusted odds ratio of CAC &gt;0 (95%CI)

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Overall median CAC score among adults with CAC &gt;0, (25th, 75th
percentiles)

Overall mean common CIMT, mm (SD)‡

2

Overall mean LV mass g/m , indexed for BSA§

BSA indicates body surface area; CAC, coronary artery calcium; CIMT,
carotid intima-media thickness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; CVH,
cardiovascular health; LV, left ventricular. \*All models were adjusted
for age, sex, race/ethnicity, and education. † P values are for linear
trends. ‡ 5889 participants had complete data for CIMT. § 4384
participants had complete data for LV mass.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Journal of the American Heart Association

5

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Over a mean follow-up of 10.3 years there were 837 CVD events, of which
210 were strokes and 462 were coronary events: 220 myocardial
infarctions, 101 CHD deaths, 306 revascularizations, and 26 resuscitated
cardiac arrests. Peripheral arterial disease developed in 83
participants, and 238 participants developed heart failure. A
disproportionate number of events occurred among participants with low
CVH scores; they comprised 41.2% of the MESA cohort but experienced more
than half of the cardiovascular (57.2%) and coronary (58.4%) events
(Tables 4 and 5). Adults with moderate

Adults with high CVH had a signiﬁcantly lower burden of subclinical CVD
for all measures studied, as shown in Table 3. Those with high and
moderate CVH scores had 71% and 43% lower odds, respectively, of having
CAC &gt;0 compared to adults with low CVH. Adults with high CVH scores
also had a 15% lower mean CIMT and a 9% lower mean LV mass than adults
with low CVH scores. The associations of CVH with subclinical disease
were similar for all races/ethnicities and both men and women. Formal
testing showed no interaction with sex or race/ethnicity.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Adjusting individually for CAC, CIMT, and LV mass— potential mediators
of the association between CVH and CVD events—only slightly attenuated
the signiﬁcant graded association between the CVH score and the risk of
a CVD event (see Table 4). Adjustment for all 3 measures of subclinical

Table 4. Risk of CVD Events According to the CVH Score—Multi-Ethnic
Study of Atherosclerosis, 2000-2013\*

CVEs, n (%)

Low CVH (0-7 Points) N=2456

Moderate CVH (8-11 Points) N=3097

High CVH (12-14 Points) N=408

479 (19.5)

340 (11.0)

18 (4.4)

White

185 (21.8)

175 (13.0)

12 (5.9)

Black

162 (19.0)

63 (9.3)

0 (0)

Hispanic

118 (18.5)

65 (10.1)

1 (0.6)

Chinese

14 (12.4)

37 (8.7)

5

1.0

0.63 (0.51-0.78)

0.33 (0.18-0.59)

White

1.0

0.69 (0.55-0.87)

0.36 (0.19-0.68)

Black

1.0

0.46 (0.35-0.62)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.59 (0.44-0.80)

0.14 (0.02-0.97)

Chinese

1.0

0.90 (0.48-1.67)

0.50 (0.18-1.42)

1.0

0.72 (0.59-0.88)

0.28 (0.14-0.57)

White

1.0

0.70 (0.57-0.87)

0.40 (0.22-0.72)

Black

1.0

0.50 (0.37-0.67)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.68 (0.50-0.93)

0.16 (0.02-1.15)

1.0

1.0 (0.54-1.86)

0.71 (0.25-2.0)

Overall HR (95%CI)

Overall CAC-adjusted HR (95%CI)

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Chinese ‡

1.0

0.63 (0.52-0.77)

0.21 (0.10-0.43)

White

1.0

0.65 (0.53-0.81)

0.35 (0.19-0.63)

Black

1.0

0.45 (0.34-0.7)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.62 (0.45-0.84)

0.15 (0.02-1.05)

Chinese

1.0

0.92 (0.49-1.71)

0.54 (0.19-1.55)

1.0

0.60 (0.47-0.76)

0.23 (0.11-0.50)

White

1.0

0.67 (0.52-0.86)

0.41 (0.22-0.77)

Black

1.0

0.46 (0.32-0.66)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.71 (0.49-1.03)

0.22 (0.03-1.59)

Chinese

1.0

0.84 (0.42-1.70)

0.76 (0.25-2.28)

1.0

0.73 (0.59-0.89)

0.49 (0.28-0.88)

White

1.0

0.74 (0.57-0.95)

0.51 (0.27-0.96)

Black

1.0

0.46 (0.32-0.67)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.82 (0.56-1.20)

0.25 (0.04-1.83)

Chinese

1.0

0.96 (0.47-1.95)

1.01 (0.33-3.08)

Overall CIMT-adjusted HR (95%CI)

Overall LV mass-adjusted HR (95%CI)

Overall CAC-CIMT-LV mass–adjusted HR (95%CI)k

§

Cardiovascular disease was deﬁned as deﬁnite or probable myocardial
infarction, death due to coronary heart disease, resuscitated cardiac
arrest, coronary revascularization, fatal or nonfatal stroke, deﬁnite or
probable heart failure, peripheral arterial disease, and cardiovascular
disease death. CAC indicates coronary artery calcium; CIMT, carotid
intima-media thickness; CVD, cardiovascular disease; CVEs,
cardiovascular events; CVH, cardiovascular health; HR, hazard ratio; LV,
left ventricular. \*All models were adjusted for age, sex,
race/ethnicity, and education. † Unable to calculate HR because there
were no events in this category. ‡ 5889 participants had complete data
for CIMT. § 4384 participants had complete data for LV mass. k 4343
participants had complete data for CAC, CIMT, and LV mass.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Journal of the American Heart Association

6

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

CVH scores experienced 40.6% of the CVD events and 38.7% of the CHD
events. CVD events were rare in those with high CVH scores. Compared to
adults with a low CVH score, those with a high score were 67% less
likely to experience a CVD event and 66% less likely to experience a CHD
event.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Low CVH (0-7 Points) N=2456

Overall coronary events, n (%)

Moderate CVH (8-11 Points) N=3097

High CVH (12-14 Points) N=408

249 (10.1)

165 (5.3)

12 (2.9)

White

114 (13.4)

96 (7.2)

9 (4.5)

Black

78 (9.1)

31 (4.6)

†

Hispanic

63 (9.9)

34 (5.3)

1 (2.3)

Chinese

10 (8.9)

23 (5.4)

3 (2.5)

1.0

0.54 (0.44-0.66)

0.34 (0.18-0.61)

White

1.0

0.56 (0.43-0.74)

0.39 (0.20-0.78)

Black

1.0

0.50 (0.33-0.76)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.59 (0.39-0.90)

0.28 (0.04-2.05)

Chinese

1.0

0.78 (0.37-1.63)

0.41 (0.11-1.51)

1.0

0.64 (0.52-0.78)

0.48 (0.27-0.87)

White

1.0

0.67 (0.51-0.89)

0.56 (0.28-1.11)

Black

1.0

0.56 (0.37-0.86)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.74 (0.48-1.13)

0.37 (0.05-2.7)

1.0

0.92 (0.44-1.94)

0.59 (0.16-2.19)

Overall HR (95%CI)

Overall CAC-adjusted HR (95%CI)

Chinese ‡

1.0

0.55 (0.45-0.68)

0.38 (0.21-0.68)

White

1.0

0.58 (0.44-0.77)

0.43 (0.21-0.85)

Black

1.0

0.50 (0.32-0.77)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.60 (0.39-0.92)

0.30 (0.04-2.17)

Chinese

1.0

0.81 (0.38-1.71)

0.46 (0.12-1.72)

1.0

0.55 (0.43-0.70)

0.40 (0.21-0.75)

White

1.0

0.53 (0.38-0.74)

0.42 (0.20-0.89)

Black

1.0

0.52 (0.30-0.87)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.77 (0.47-1.27)

0.46 (0.06-3.37)

Chinese

1.0

0.91 (0.38-2.15)

0.69 (0.17-2.76)

1.0

0.64 (0.50-0.82)

0.57 (0.30-1.07)

White

1.0

0.62 (0.44-0.87)

0.58 (0.27-1.24)

Black

1.0

0.56 (0.32-0.97)

†

Hispanic

1.0

0.91 (0.54-1.52)

0.55 (0.07-4.06)

Chinese

1.0

1.11 (0.46-2.67)

0.95 (0.23-3.90)

Overall CIMT-adjusted HR (95%CI)

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Overall LV mass-adjusted HR (95%CI)

§

Overall CAC-CIMT-LV mass–adjusted HR (95% CI)k

Coronary heart disease was deﬁned as deﬁnite or probable myocardial
infarction, death due to coronary heart disease, resuscitated cardiac
arrest, and coronary revascularization. CAC indicates coronary artery
calcium; CIMT, carotid intima-media thickness; CVH, cardiovascular
health; HR, hazard ratio; LV, left ventricular. \*All models were
adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity, and education. † We are unable to
calculate HR because there were no events in this category. ‡ 5889
participants had complete data for CIMT. § 4384 participants had
complete data for LV mass. k 4343 participants had complete data for
CAC, CIMT, and LV mass.

disease in the same model (Table 4) attenuated the association, but it
nonetheless remained signiﬁcant for CVD. For CHD the association
remained signiﬁcant with adjustment for the individual measures of
subclinical disease, but remained signiﬁcant for moderate scores only
with adjustment for CAC, CIMT, and LV mass together (Table 5). However,
the number of CHD events available for analysis decreased by 34% DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

because only adults with all 3 measures were included. We did not ﬁnd
signiﬁcant interactions between CVH scores and race/ethnicity or sex
(data not shown). When the analyses were stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity,
the results were limited by small sample size—CVD events occurred among
only 1 Hispanic, 5 Chinese, and 0 black participants with high CVH
scores. The associations between CVH scores and CVD and Journal of the
American Heart Association

7

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Table 5. Risk of Coronary Heart Disease Events According to the CVH
Score—Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis, 2000-2013\*

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Discussion

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

In the large community-based MESA cohort we found a strong inverse
association between overall CVH, as deﬁned by the AHA’s 7 metrics, and
subclinical CVD and subsequent CVEs. Compared with individuals who had
low CVH scores, those with high and moderate levels of CVH had a
signiﬁcantly lower burden of subclinical CVD and markedly lower risks
for CVD and CHD events over 10 years of follow-up. Importantly, we found
that the association of CVH with future events and subclinical disease
was similar across racial and ethnic groups and between men and women.
Of note, the signiﬁcant and substantial associations of high and
moderate levels of CVH with lower risk for CVD were maintained after
adjustment for CAC, CIMT, and LV mass— measures of subclinical CVD that
would be expected to link CVH status with subsequent risk. It is
possible that CAC, CIMT, and LV mass do not fully encompass subclinical
disease, and so we have not adjusted for it completely. Alternatively,
our results may suggest that the protection afforded by greater CVH
involves pathways other than those related to atherosclerosis and
cardiac stress. Thus, the additional beneﬁts of high CVH may reﬂect
aspects of a healthy lifestyle or physical ﬁtness that are not measured
in the CVH score and warrant further study.25 Also of note is that more
than 25% of adults with high CVH had CAC &gt;0. One potential
explanation is that the CVH score may have a stronger association with
factors such as plaque morphology than with the presence or absence of
atherosclerosis. For example, autopsy and imaging studies demonstrate
that the pattern and degree of calciﬁcation vary widely based on plaque
morphology and suggest that calciﬁcation alone is not an adequate marker
of plaque vulnerability.26 Another consideration is that we classiﬁed
adults with nonideal levels for 1 or 2 metrics as high CVH because so
few MESA participants met all 7 ideal health criteria. As a result, we
may have underestimated the strength of association between ideal CVH
and a lower burden of subclinical CVD and events. Our ﬁndings complement
those of Xanthakis et al, who examined the association of CVH with
clinical events and multiple serum and imaging biomarkers of
neurohormonal DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

activation, cardiac stress, and atherosclerosis in the Framingham
Offspring study.9 The Framingham investigators similarly found an
inverse linear association between higher CVH scores and lower risk of
future events after adjusting for the biomarkers that could mediate the
association between CVH and clinical events. Our study adds to the
literature by demonstrating that the association of CVH and CVD remains
signiﬁcant in a multiethnic cohort after adjustment for CAC. Our results
highlight signiﬁcant socioeconomic and racial/ ethnic disparities within
the spectrum of CVH, as have other studies.3,5,6 In MESA, adults with
high CVH scores had a higher income and education compared to those with
moderate and low scores. Blacks and Hispanics were substantially more
likely to have low and moderate scores compared to high scores.
Addressing such disparities will be an important component of successful
interventions, such as improving access to healthy food and places to
exercise in all communities. Importantly, we found that the association
of the CVH score and CVEs was similar across race/ethnic groups, as did
investigators from NOMAS.6 Thus, improving CVH is likely to be a means
for reducing disparities in CVD outcomes. Our results are also
consistent with those of the INTERHEART study, which showed that
modiﬁable risk factors similarly accounted for &gt;90% of the risk of
myocardial infarction across 52 countries, regardless of age or sex.27
Our results differ slightly from those of NOMAS in relation to the risk
of events among Hispanic participants. In NOMAS, Hispanic participants
experienced a slightly lower risk of events than white or black
participants despite having less favorable control of their
cardiovascular risk factors, which has been termed the Hispanic
paradox.6,28 The NOMAS investigators suggested that factors beyond the 7
metrics of CVH, such as genetic and sociocultural factors, may
contribute to the risk of CVD events.6 In MESA, the event rates among
Hispanic participants were similar to those of other racial/ethnic
groups after adjustment for CVH scores. One potential explanation is
that in NOMAS the Hispanic participants represented a more homogeneous
population than in MESA. NOMAS participants were primarily foreign-born
from countries in the Caribbean (62% from the Dominican Republic). Of
the Hispanic participants in MESA, 68.5% were born outside of the United
States; many were from Mexico and South America.29 Similar to other
population-based studies the prevalence of ideal levels of all 7 metrics
was &lt;1% among MESA participants.3-6 In addition, about 40% of MESA
participants had poor levels of multiple health factors and behaviors.
Importantly, we found that adults who had primarily intermediate levels
of health factors and behaviors—meaning they had prehypertension,
impaired glucose tolerance, borderline hypercholesterolemia, or
medically controlled levels of these risk factors—experienced a lower
burden of subclinical Journal of the American Heart Association

8

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

CHD events remained signiﬁcant among white participants with moderate
and high CVH scores and among black participants with moderate CVH
scores. When the CVH score was examined as a continuous measure, we
observed an approximately linear association with CVD and CHD risks for
every racial/ethnic group (see Figures 1 and 2). The risk of an event
was progressively lower with higher CV health scores without evidence of
a plateau, although the conﬁdence intervals widened with higher scores.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Figure 1. Association of the cardiovascular health score with the log
hazard ratio of a cardiovascular disease event, Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis, 2000-2013. A, The association for the entire cohort;
subsequent panels are stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. B, White
participants. C, Hispanic participants. D, Black participants. E,
Chinese participants. CV indicates cardiovascular.

disease and fewer CVEs than those with primarily poor levels. Although
there have been encouraging population-level trends in the control of
certain health factors, such as decreases in smoking, blood pressure,
and cholesterol levels, these improvements have been offset by a
dramatic increase in DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

obesity and diabetes.4 It is possible that the rise in prevalence of
obesity and diabetes at least partially explains why men and women less
than age 55 have experienced a signiﬁcantly smaller decline in CHD
mortality since the year 2000, compared to adults above age 65.30 If
current trends Journal of the American Heart Association

9

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Figure 2. Association of the cardiovascular health score with the log
hazard ratio of a coronary heart disease event, Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis, 2000-2013. Data are presented for the entire cohort and
stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. A, The association for the entire cohort;
subsequent panels are stratiﬁed by race/ethnicity. B, White
participants. C, Hispanic participants. D, Black participants. E,
Chinese participants. CV indicates cardiovascular.

continue, population-level CVH in the United States is projected to
improve by only 6% between 2006 and 2020, far short of the target set in
the AHA’s Strategic Impact Goal. Our results suggest that public health
efforts should not focus DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

solely on achieving ideal levels of CVH metrics. Even shifting
individuals from poor to intermediate health could translate into a
reduction in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality over time. Journal
of the American Heart Association

10

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024

Conclusions Using a CVH score derived from the AHA’s construct of CVH,
we found a strong, inverse graded association between CVH scores and
both subclinical disease and CVD and CHD events in MESA. We found that
the association of CVH scores with subclinical and clinical disease was
similar across racial/ ethnic groups and between men and women. Adults
with higher CVH scores had lower CAC prevalence, CIMT, and LV mass.
Adjusting for CAC, CIMT, and LV mass only partially attenuated the
strong associations between higher CVH scores and a lower incidence of
CVD. Our results underscore the need to adopt interventions that address
all levels of CVH across men and women and the diverse subgroups of our
population.

Acknowledgments The authors thank the other investigators, staff, and
participants of the MESA study for their valuable contributions.

95161, N01-HC-95162, N01-HC-95163, N01-HC-95164, N01-HC-95165,
N01-HC-95166, N01-HC-95167, N01-HC95168, and N01-HC-95169 from the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and by grants UL1-TR-000040
and UL1-TR001079 from the National Center for Research Resources.

Disclosures None.

References 1. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel
LJ, Van Horn L, Greenlund K, Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Arnett
DK, Fonarow GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi FA, Robertson RM, Roger V,
Schwamm LH, Sorlie P, Yancy CW, Rosamond WD. Deﬁning and setting
national goals for cardiovascular health promotion and disease
reduction: the American Heart Association’s Strategic Impact Goal
through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613. 2. Shah AM,
Claggett B, Folsom AR, Lutsey PL, Ballantyne CM, Heiss G, Solomon SD.
Ideal cardiovascular health during adult life and cardiovascular
structure and function among the elderly. Circulation.
2015;132:1979–1989. 3. Folsom AR, Yatsuya H, Nettleton JA, Lutsey PL,
Cushman M, Rosamond WD; ARIC Study Investigators. Community prevalence
of ideal cardiovascular health, by the American Heart Association
deﬁnition, and relationship with cardiovascular disease incidence. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1690–1696. 4. Yang Q, Cogswell ME, Flanders WD,
Hong Y, Zhang Z, Loustalot F, Gillespie C, Merritt R, Hu FB. Trends in
cardiovascular health metrics and associations with all-cause and CVD
mortality among US adults. JAMA. 2012;307:1273–1283. 5. Bambs C, Kip KE,
Dinga A, Mulukutla SR, Aiyer AN, Reis SE. Low prevalence of “ideal
cardiovascular health” in a community-based population: the heart
strategies concentrating on risk evaluation (Heart SCORE) study.
Circulation. 2011;123:850–857. 6. Dong C, Rundek T, Wright CB, Anwar Z,
Elkind MS, Sacco RL. Ideal cardiovascular health predicts lower risks of
myocardial infarction, stroke, and vascular death across whites, blacks,
and Hispanics: the northern Manhattan study. Circulation.
2012;125:2975–2984. 7. Ahmed HM, Blaha MJ, Nasir K, Jones SR, Rivera JJ,
Agatston A, Blankstein R, Wong ND, Lakoski S, Budoff MJ, Burke GL,
Sibley CT, Ouyang P, Blumenthal RS. Low-risk lifestyle, coronary
calcium, cardiovascular events, and mortality: results from MESA. Am J
Epidemiol. 2013;178:12–21. 8. Ford ES, Greenlund KJ, Hong Y. Ideal
cardiovascular health and mortality from all causes and diseases of the
circulatory system among adults in the United States. Circulation.
2012;125:987–995. 9. Xanthakis V, Enserro DM, Murabito JM, Polak JF,
Wollert KC, Januzzi JL, Wang TJ, Toﬂer G, Vasan RS. Ideal cardiovascular
health: associations with biomarkers and subclinical disease and impact
on incidence of cardiovascular disease in the Framingham Offspring
Study. Circulation. 2014;130:1676–1683. 10. Rasmussen-Torvik LJ, Shay
CM, Abramson JG, Friedrich CA, Nettleton JA, Prizment AE, Folsom AR.
Ideal cardiovascular health is inversely associated with incident
cancer: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study. Circulation.
2013;127:1270–1275. 11. Bild DE, Bluemke DA, Burke GL, Detrano R, Diez
Roux AV, Folsom AR, Greenland P, Jacob DR Jr, Kronmal R, Liu K, Nelson
JC, O’Leary D, Saad MF, Shea S, Szklo M, Tracy RP. Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis: objectives and design. Am J Epidemiol.
2002;156:871–881. 12. Ainsworth BE, Irwin ML, Addy CL, Whitt MC,
Stolarczyk LM. Moderate physical activity patterns of minority women:
the Cross-Cultural Activity Participation Study. J Womens Health Gend
Based Med. 1999;8:805–813. 13. Bertoni AG, Whitt-Glover MC, Chung H, Le
KY, Barr RG, Mahesh M, Jenny NS, Burke GL, Jacobs DR. The association
between physical activity and subclinical atherosclerosis: the
Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169:444–454.

Sources of Funding

14. Nettleton JA, Steffen LM, Mayer-Davis EJ, Jenny NS, Jiang R,
    Herrington DM, Jacobs DR Jr. Dietary patterns are associated with
    biochemical markers of inﬂammation and endothelial activation in the
    Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Am J Clin Nutr.
    2006;83:1369–1379.

This research was supported by contracts HHSN268201500003I,
N01-HC-95159, N01-HC-95160, N01-HC-

15. Block G, Woods M, Potosky A, Clifford C. Validation of a
    self-administered diet history questionnaire using multiple diet
    records. J Clin Epidemiol. 1990;43:1327–1335.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Journal of the American Heart Association

11

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Improvements in CVH would also have downstream effects on far more than
just cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Higher levels of CVH are
associated with a broad range of health beneﬁts, including fewer
symptoms of depression,31 improved cognition,32 better quality of
life,33,34 lower incidence of cancer,10 lower health care
expenditures,35 and lower all-cause mortality.7 Our analysis has
limitations that should be acknowledged. Physical activity and diet were
assessed by self-report and so are susceptible to recall and social
desirability bias.13 We were not able to calculate the diet score as
described in the Strategic Impact Goals because of the way the food
frequency questionnaire was structured. We reported a prevalence of an
ideal diet of 4.6%, which is higher than that in other cohort
studies.3,6 It is therefore possible that some participants were
misclassiﬁed as having an ideal diet, which would have biased our
results to the null. As recommended by the AHA, we weighted all health
factors and behaviors equally when calculating the CVH scores. However,
we do not feel this diminishes the score’s value, given that it is meant
as a tool for monitoring the population’s CVH and not for risk
prediction. Prior studies have demonstrated a stepwise reduction in risk
for each additional metric at ideal levels without differentiating
between the different metrics, suggesting that our approach was valid.3
This was additionally conﬁrmed in our spline analysis.

Cardiovascular Health, Subclinical CVD, and Events

Polonsky et al

26. Otsuka F, Sakakura K, Yahagi K, Joner M, Virmani R. Has our
    understanding of calciﬁcation in human coronary atherosclerosis
    progressed? Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34:724–736.

27. Nettleton JA, Polak JF, Tracy R, Burke GL, Jacobs DR Jr. Dietary
    patterns and incident cardiovascular disease in the Multi-Ethnic
    Study of Atherosclerosis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;90:647–654.

28. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, Dans T, Avezum A, Lanas F, McQueen M,
    Budaj A, Pais P, Varigos J, Lisheng L; INTERHEART Study
    Investigators. Effect of potentially modiﬁable risk factors
    associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the
    INTERHEART study): case-control study. Lancet. 2004;364:937–
29. 30. Carr JJ, Nelson JC, Wong ND, McNitt-Gray M, Arad Y, Jacobs DR
    Jr, Sidney S, Bild DE, Williams OD, Detrano RC. Calciﬁed coronary
    artery plaque measurement with cardiac CT in population-based
    studies: standardized protocol of Multi-Ethnic Study of
    Atherosclerosis (MESA) and Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young
    Adults (CARDIA) study. Radiology. 2005;234:35–43.
31. O’Leary DH, Polak JF, Wolfson SK Jr, Bond MG, Bommer W, Sheth S,
    Psaty BM, Sharrett AR, Manolio TA. Use of sonography to evaluate
    carotid atherosclerosis in the elderly. The Cardiovascular Health
    Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group. Stroke. 1991;22:1155–1163.
32. Bluemke DA, Kronmal RA, Lima JA, Liu K, Olson J, Burke GL, Folsom
    AR. The relationship of left ventricular mass and geometry to
    incident cardiovascular events: the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of
    Atherosclerosis) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:2148–2155.
33. Natori S, Lai S, Finn JP, Gomes AS, Hundley WG, Jerosch-Herold M,
    Pearson G, Sinha S, Arai A, Lima JA, Bluemke DA. Cardiovascular
    function in multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis: normal values by
    age, sex, and ethnicity. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2006;186:S357–S365.
34. Wassel CL, Berardi C, Pankow JS, Larson NB, Decker PA, Hanson NQ,
    Tsai MY, Criqui MH, Allison MA, Bielinski SJ. Soluble P-selectin
    predicts lower extremity peripheral artery disease incidence and
    change in the ankle brachial index: the Multi-Ethnic Study of
    Atherosclerosis (MESA). Atherosclerosis. 2015;239:405–
35. 36. Shay CM, Ning H, Daniels SR, Rooks CR, Gidding SS, Lloyd-Jones
    DM. Status of cardiovascular health in US adolescents: prevalence
    estimates from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys
    (NHANES) 2005-2010. Circulation. 2013;127:1369–1376.
37. Huffman MD, Capewell S, Ning H, Shay CM, Ford ES, Lloyd-Jones DM.
    Cardiovascular health behavior and health factor changes (1988-2008)
    and projections to 2020: results from the National Health and
    Nutrition Examination Surveys. Circulation. 2012;125:2595–2602.
38. Lloyd-Jones DM. Cardiovascular health and protection against CVD:
    more than the sum of the parts? Circulation. 2014;130:1671–1673.

39. Rodriguez CJ. Disparities in ideal cardiovascular health: a
    challenge or an opportunity? Circulation. 2012;125:2963–2964.
40. Diez Roux AV, Detrano R, Jackson S, Jacobs DR Jr, Schreiner PJ, Shea
    S, Szklo M. Acculturation and socioeconomic position as predictors
    of coronary calciﬁcation in a multiethnic sample. Circulation.
    2005;112:1557–1565.
41. Wilmot KA, O’Flaherty M, Capewell S, Ford ES, Vaccarino V. Coronary
    heart disease mortality declines in the United States from 1979
    through 2011: evidence for stagnation in young adults, especially
    women. Circulation. 2015;132:997–1002.
42. Kronish IM, Carson AP, Davidson KW, Muntner P, Safford MM.
    Depressive symptoms and cardiovascular health by the American Heart
    Association’s deﬁnition in the Reasons for Geographic and Racial
    Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study. PLoS One. 2012;7:e52771.
43. Thacker EL, Gillett SR, Wadley VG, Unverzagt FW, Judd SE, McClure
    LA, Howard VJ, Cushman M. The American Heart Association life’s
    simple 7 and incident cognitive impairment: the REasons for
    Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study. J Am
    Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000635. DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000635.
44. Allen NB, Badon S, Greenlund KJ, Huffman M, Hong Y, Lloyd-Jones DM.
    The association between cardiovascular health and health-related
    quality of life and health status measures among U.S. adults: a
    cross-sectional study of the National Health and Nutrition
    Examination Surveys, 2001-2010. Health Qual Life Outcomes.
    2015;13:152.
45. Daviglus ML, Liu K, Pirzada A, Yan LL, Garside DB, Feinglass J,
    Guralnik JM, Greenland P, Stamler J. Favorable cardiovascular risk
    proﬁle in middle age and health-related quality of life in older
    age. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:2460–2468.
46. Daviglus ML, Liu K, Greenland P, Dyer AR, Garside DB, Manheim L,
    Lowe LP, Rodin M, Lubitz J, Stamler J. Beneﬁt of a favorable
    cardiovascular risk-factor proﬁle in middle age with respect to
    Medicare costs. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:1122–1129.

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on January 31, 2024 DOI:
10.1161/JAHA.116.004894

Journal of the American Heart Association

12

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

16. Mayer-Davis EJ, Vitolins MZ, Carmichael SL, Hemphill S, Tsaroucha G,
    Rushing J, Levin S. Validity and reproducibility of a food frequency
    interview in a MultiCultural Epidemiology Study. Ann Epidemiol.
    1999;9:314–324.


